PMM-9956 Release Notes 2.28.0 (#781)
percona/pmm-doc: docs/release-notes/2.28.0.md

    * Support for multiple queries
    * Support for Victoria Metrics as a data source

    In a nutshell, these changes will allow experts to create more intelligent advisor checks so that we can continue delivering more value to your connected PMM instances.

    The file format in which Advisors checks are written has been updated to support the new functionality provided by the Advisors service part of Percona Platform.

    This is a  breaking change, so we recommend upgrading your PMM instance to benefit from these enhancements. For more information, see [Develop Advisors](https://docs.percona.com/percona-monitoring-and-management/details/develop-checks.html). 

### Ubuntu 22.04 LTS support
From this release, we are also providing binaries for the recently released version of Ubuntu

### Components upgrade
  - **VictoriaMetrics**: VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded to [1.76.1](https://github.com/VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics/releases/tag/v1.76.1).
  - **Node exporter**: Node Exporter has now been updated to `1.3.1`.

    !!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"

>         If you customized the disabled collectors, the list could change. Check the available collectors in [Documentation](https://github.com/percona/node_exporter/blob/main/README.md#collectors).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        If you customized the [disabled collectors](https://docs.percona.com/percona-monitoring-and-management/details/commands/pmm-admin.html#disable-collectors), the list could change. Check the available collectors in [Documentation](https://github.com/percona/node_exporter/blob/main/README.md#collectors).
```

# Percona Monitoring and Management 2.28.0

<table class="docutils field-list" frame="void" rules="none">
  <colgroup>
    <col class="field-name">
    <col class="field-body">
  </colgroup>
  <tbody valign="top">
    <tr class="field-odd field">
    <th class="field-name">Date:</th>
    <td class="field-body">May 12, 2022</td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="field-even field">
      <th class="field-name">Installation:</th>
      <td class="field-body">
        <a class="reference external" href="https://www.percona.com/software/pmm/quickstart">Installing Percona Monitoring and Management</a></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>

> </table>

Reviewer 2: This whole table is somewhat redundant, since we can achieve the same goal with just a few lines of markdown. Do you want me to try?

Reviewer 2: And the formatting is a bit broken
<img width="781" alt="Screenshot 2022-05-05 at 13 08 44" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/81549/166903183-c533dba3-6f56-4ea2-abb6-08d5ebc7f14d.png">

Author: Sure!

> Percona Monitoring and Management (PMM) is a free and open-source platform for managing and monitoring MySQL, MongoDB, and PostgreSQL performance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Percona Monitoring and Management (PMM) is an open source database monitoring, management, and observability solution for MySQL, PostgreSQL and MongoDB.
```
Per a recent  suggestion from Marketing team

- **Enhanced Advisor checks**

    PMM 2.28 includes a new major version of Advisors that features some important enhancements. The most significant changes are:

    * Support for multiple queries
    * Support for Victoria Metrics as a data source

    In a nutshell, these changes will allow experts to create more intelligent advisor checks so that we can continue delivering more value to your connected PMM instances.

    The file format in which Advisors checks are written has been updated to support the new functionality provided by the Advisors service part of Percona Platform.

    This is a  breaking change, so we recommend upgrading your PMM instance to benefit from these enhancements. For more information, see [Develop Advisors](https://docs.percona.com/percona-monitoring-and-management/details/develop-checks.html). 

### Ubuntu 22.04 LTS support

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From this release, we are also providing binaries for the recently released version of Ubuntu
```

### Components upgrade
  - **VictoriaMetrics**: VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded to [1.76.1](https://github.com/VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics/releases/tag/v1.76.1).
  - **Node exporter**: Node Exporter has now been updated to `1.3.1`.

!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"

>     If you customized the disabled collectors, the list could change. Check the available collectors in [Documentation](https://github.com/percona/node_exporter/blob/main/README.md#collectors).

Reviewer: this caution should be either under Node Exporter or mention it

Author: Yes, it was not aligned properly. Fixed that.

>         If you customized the disabled collectors, the list could change. Check the available collectors in [Documentation](https://github.com/percona/node_exporter/blob/main/README.md#collectors).

Reviewer 3: Can we reference  "disabled collectors" to the specific section in pmm-admin documentation?

    
    !!! note alert alert-primary "Note"
        Upgrading to PMM will automatically enable this feature for existing PMM instances. You can disable it at any time from your PMM dashboard on the **Advanced Settings** page.

- **Run individual advisor checks**

    In addition to running all available advisors at once, you now have the option to run each advisor check individually. 

    This gives you more granular control over the checks on your connected databases. Running checks individually also means that you get the results for relevant advisors faster and that you can focus on resolving failed checks one at a time. For more information, see [Working with Advisor checks](https://docs.percona.com/percona-monitoring-and-management/how-to/advisors.html).

- **Enhanced Advisor checks**

    PMM 2.28 includes a new major version of Advisors that features some important enhancements. The most significant changes are:

    * Support for multiple queries
    * Support for Victoria Metrics as a data source

>     In a nutshell, these are changes will allow experts to create more intelligent advisor checks so that we can continue delivering more value to your connected PMM instances.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    In a nutshell, these changes will allow experts to create more intelligent advisor checks so that we can continue delivering more value to your connected PMM instances.
```

    The file format in which Advisors checks are written has been updated to support the new functionality provided by the Advisors service part of Percona Platform.

>     This is a  breaking change, so we recommend upgrading your PMM instance to benefit from these enhancements. For more information see [Develop Advisors](https://docs.percona.com/percona-monitoring-and-management/details/develop-checks.html). 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    This is a  breaking change, so we recommend upgrading your PMM instance to benefit from these enhancements. For more information, see [Develop Advisors](https://docs.percona.com/percona-monitoring-and-management/details/develop-checks.html). 
```

- [PMM-9749](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9849): Advisors: Possibility to run individual advisor checks separately

- [PMM-9469](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9469): Advisors: Ability to have multiple queries in a single check

- [PMM-9468](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9468): Advisors: Ability to query VictoriaMetrics as a data source.

## Improvements

- [PMM-9841](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9841): Advisors: Advisor checks are now enabled by default.

- [PMM-8326](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8326): Advisors: Changed the icon for the **Edit Check Rule** option with a more suggestive one that better reflects this functionality.

- [PMM-9907](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9907): pmm2-client now supports Ubuntu 22.04 LTS.

- [PMM-9780](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9780): VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded to 1.76.1.

- [PMM-5871](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-5871): Node Exporter has now been updated to 1.3.1.

- [PMM-9958](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9958): The PMM logs button, which is used to download PMM logs for troubleshooting, is added to the help panel for better accessibility and enhanced user experience.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [PMM-9672](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9672): Minor UI improvements to the visual elements in the breadcrumb trails to visually align them to the look-and-feel of Grafana pages and improve overall UI consistency.

```

- [PMM-9426](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9426): DBaaS: Fixed an issue related to K8s monitoring where the k8s monitoring failed with k8s version 1.22 and higher.

- [PMM-9885](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9885): Dashboard: Fixed the documentation links on the **Advanced settings** page on the PMM dashboard.

- [PMM-9828](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9828): Fixed an issue with the QAN dashboard navigator/explorer where if you open QAN from a dashboard and try to navigate to a different dashboard, the explorer keeps closing/refreshing, making it impossible to navigate.
- [PMM-9363](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9363): PMM users logged in via SSO would still have access to PMM after disconnecting. This issue is now fixed and PMM correctly terminates SSO sessions after disconnecting.

- [PMM-9415](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9415): Fixed an issue where initial data restore on AWS instances fails. However, consecutive data restore attempts were successful.

## Known Issues

**Issue**

> `origin not allowed` error is thrown while accessing the PMM dashboard after upgrading to PMM 2.27.0 and onwards when using a reverse proxy like Nginx.

Author: @nikita-b Please check if this is correct

Reviewer 5: @rasika-chivate let's add it for 2.27.0 release notes too.

And I think we can rephrase it:

If you are using a reverse proxy (for example nginx) in front of PMM you can see an error: `origin not allowed` after updating to PMM 2.27.0 or newer.

# Percona Monitoring and Management 2.28.0

| **Release date:** | May 12, 2022                                                                                    |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Installation:** | [Installing Percona Monitoring and Management](https://www.percona.com/software/pmm/quickstart) |

Percona Monitoring and Management (PMM) is an open source database monitoring, management, and observability solution for MySQL, PostgreSQL and MongoDB.

!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"

>     We recommend using the latest version of the PMM instance. This ensures that you access the latest features of the underlying components, such as VictoriaMetrics, with all the bug fixes in place.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    We recommend using the latest version of PMM. This ensures not only that you have access to the latest PMM features but also that your environment runs on the latest version of the underlying components, such as VictoriaMetrics, with all the bug fixes in place.
```

## Release Highlights

### Advisors

- **Advisor checks enabled by default**

>   Starting with the previous release and continuing with this one, we have added significant improvements to the Advisors Checks functionality in performance, assessment coverage, and user experience.

Reviewer: this looks weird on Render - it is not aligned with bullet list, so maybe we need to shift text to the right for all bullet list descriptions ?

Author: Sure @denisok . I will do a final check and take care of the alignment issues.

    As a mature and generally useful feature, this option is now enabled by default for easier access to automatic checks and better insight into database health and performance, delivered by Percona Platform.

    !!! note alert alert-primary "Note"
        Upgrading to PMM will automatically enable this feature for existing PMM instances. You can disable it at any time from your PMM dashboard on the **Advanced Settings** page.

- **Run individual advisor checks**

    In addition to running all available advisors at once, you now have the option to run each advisor check individually.

    This gives you more granular control over the checks on your connected databases. Running checks individually also means that you get the results for relevant advisors faster and that you can focus on resolving failed checks one at a time. For more information, see [Working with Advisor checks](https://docs.percona.com/percona-monitoring-and-management/how-to/advisors.html).

- **Enhanced Advisor checks**

    PMM 2.28 includes a new major version of Advisors that features some important enhancements. The most significant changes are:

>      - Support for multiple queries

Reviewer: doesn't render correctly, needs more idents

  - Support for Victoria Metrics as a data source

  In a nutshell, these changes will allow experts to create more intelligent advisor checks so that we can continue delivering more value to your connected PMM instances.

>   The file format in which Advisors checks are written has been updated to support the new functionality provided by the Advisors service part of Percona Platform.

Reviewer 6: This sentence and the one below should go together in a single paragraph, without a breaking line.

  This is a breaking change, so we recommend upgrading your PMM instance to benefit from these enhancements. For more information, see [Develop Advisors](https://docs.percona.com/percona-monitoring-and-management/details/develop-checks.html).

### Ubuntu 22.04 LTS support

We are providing binaries for the recently released version of Ubuntu from this release.

### Components upgrade

- **VictoriaMetrics**: VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded to [1.76.1](https://github.com/VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics/releases/tag/v1.76.1).

- **Node exporter**: Node Exporter has now been updated to 1.3.1.

    !!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"
        If you customized the [disabled collectors](https://docs.percona.com/percona-monitoring-and-management/details/commands/pmm-admin.html#disable-collectors), the list could change. Check the available collectors in [Documentation](https://github.com/percona/node_exporter/blob/main/README.md#collectors).

## New Features

> - [PMM-9749](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9849): Advisors: Possibility to run individual advisor checks separately

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [PMM-9749](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9849): Advisors: Possibility to run individual advisor checks separately.
```

> - [PMM-9469](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9469): Advisors: Ability to have multiple queries in a single check

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [PMM-9469](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9469): Advisors: Ability to have multiple queries in a single check.
```

- [PMM-9907](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9907): pmm2-client now supports Ubuntu 22.04 LTS.

- [PMM-9780](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9780): VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded to 1.76.1.

- [PMM-5871](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-5871): Node Exporter has now been updated to 1.3.1.

- [PMM-9958](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9958): The PMM logs button, which is used to download PMM logs for troubleshooting, is added to the help panel for better accessibility and enhanced user experience.
- [PMM-9672](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9672): Minor UI improvements to the visual elements in the breadcrumb trails to visually align them to the look-and-feel of Grafana pages and improve overall UI consistency.

## Bugs Fixed

- [PMM-9854](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9854): Advisors: In some scenarios, PMM was not displaying the complete list of advisors available for instances connected to Percona Platform. This issue is now fixed.

- [PMM-9848](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9848): Advisors: Fixed text contrast issue on the **Failed Advisor Checks** page that was visible when navigating the list of results while using PMM with the Light theme.

> - [PMM-9426](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9426): DBaaS: Fixed an issue related to K8s monitoring where the k8s monitoring failed with k8s version 1.22 and higher.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [PMM-9426](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9426): DBaaS: Fixed an issue related to K8s monitoring where the K8s monitoring failed with K8s version 1.22 and higher.
```

- [PMM-9885](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9885): Dashboard: Fixed the documentation links on the **Advanced settings** page on the PMM dashboard.

- [PMM-9828](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9828): Fixed an issue with the QAN dashboard navigator/explorer where if you open QAN from a dashboard and try to navigate to a different dashboard, the explorer keeps closing/refreshing, making it impossible to navigate.
- [PMM-9363](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9363): PMM users logged in via SSO would still have access to PMM after disconnecting. This issue is now fixed and PMM correctly terminates SSO sessions after disconnecting.

> - [PMM-9415](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9415): Fixed an issue where initial data restore on AWS instances fails. However, consecutive data restore attempts were successful.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [PMM-9415](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9415): Backup Management: Fixed an issue where initial data restore on AWS instances fails. However, consecutive data restore attempts were successful.
```

## Known Issues

> **Issue**

Reviewer 3: We need to add here the Jira ID for the users to follow this problem

Author: Sure @rnovikovP

# Percona Monitoring and Management 2.28.0

<table class="docutils field-list" frame="void" rules="none">
  <colgroup>
    <col class="field-name">
    <col class="field-body">
  </colgroup>
  <tbody valign="top">
    <tr class="field-odd field">
    <th class="field-name">Date:</th>

>     <td class="field-body">May 14, 2022</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td class="field-body">May 12, 2022</td>
```

- **Enhanced Advisor checks**

    PMM 2.28 includes a new major version of Advisors that features some important enhancements. The most significant changes are:

    * Support for multiple queries
    * Support for Victoria Metrics as a data source

    In a nutshell, these are changes will allow experts to create more intelligent advisor checks so that we can continue delivering more value to your connected PMM instances.

    The file format in which Advisors checks are written has been updated in order to support the new functionality provided by the Advisors service in Percona Platform. 

    This is a breaking change so it is highly recommended to upgrade your PMM to benefit from these enhancements. For more information see [Develop Advisors](https://docs.percona.com/percona-monitoring-and-management/details/develop-checks.html). 

### Ubuntu 22.04 LTS support

### Components upgrade
  - **VictoriaMetrics**: VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded to [1.76.1](https://github.com/VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics/releases/tag/v1.76.1).

>   - **Node exporter**: Node Exporter has now been updated to `1.1.X`.

Reviewer: @rnovikovP do we need this ? new node exporter suppose to work 1:1 with old one. Maybe there are new features, but we probably first need to find out and adjust dashboards.

Author: @rnovikovP Please confirm if we need to skip this or include this...

Reviewer 3: If we did an Update of the exporter - it's a must to be mentioned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Node exporter**: Node Exporter has now been updated to `1.3.1`. Please be aware that if you customized disabled collectors the list could change, please check available collectors in [documentation](https://github.com/percona/node_exporter/blob/main/README.md#collectors).
```

@rasika-chivate we decided to mentioned it and point to the list of new collectors that are available for ppl. We probably need something like:

## New Features

- [PMM-9749](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9849): Advisors: Possibility to run individual advisor checks separately

- [PMM-9469](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9469): Advisors: Ability to have multiple queries in single check

- [PMM-9468](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9468): Advisors: Ability to query VictoriaMetrics as a data source.

## Improvements

- [PMM-9839](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9839): Advisors: Fixed severity naming inconsistency for Critical checks.
 
- [PMM-9841](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9841): Advisors: Advisor checks are now enabled by default.

- [PMM-8326](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8326): Advisors: Changed the icon for the Edit Check Rule option with a more suggestive one, that better reflects this functionality.

- [PMM-9362](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9362): Disconnect PMM and Portal: non-portal user can not perform disconnect

- [PMM-9907](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9907): pmm2-client now supports Ubuntu 22.04 LTS.

- [PMM-9780](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9780): VictoriaMetrics has been upgraded to 1.76.1. 

> - [PMM-5871](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-5871): Node Exporter has now been updated to 1.1.x.

Reviewer: we probably don't need this.

Reviewer: I mean Node Exported is not needed in RN

Author: @JiriCtvrtka @denisok  Please confirm what exactly needs to be mentioned as I am not sure what exactly has changed due to this update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-5871](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-5871): Node Exporter has now been updated to 1.3.1.
```

> - [PMM-9729](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9729): The Go version has now been updated to 1.18.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

we don't need this, technical task

## Bugs Fixed

- [PMM-9854](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9854): Advisors: In some scenarios, PMM was not displaying the full list of advisors available for instances connected to Percona Platform. This issue is now fixed.

- [PMM-8326](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-8326): Advisors: Fixed text contrast issue on the **Failed Advisor Checks** page that was visible when navigating the list of results while using PMM with using the Light theme. 

- [PMM-9426](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9426): DBaaS: Fixed an issue related to K8s monitoring where the k8s monitoring failed with k8s version 1.22 and higher.

- [PMM-9363](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9363): Disconnect PMM and Portal: Logout user who disconnects pmm

- [PMM-9885](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9885): Dashboard: Fixed the documentation links on the Advanced settings page on the PMM dashboard.

> - [PMM-9770](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9770): Fixed an issue where the query count displayed in PMM was incorrect and inconsistent.

Reviewer: we also need [PMM-9828](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9828)
QAN Dashboard Navigator is not usable incase user redirected from a Dashboard ?

- [PMM-9885](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9885): Dashboard: Fixed the documentation links on the Advanced settings page on the PMM dashboard.

- [PMM-9828](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9828): Fixed an issue with the QAN dashboard navigator/explorer where if you open QAN from a dashboard and try to navigate to a different dashboard, the explorer keeps closing/refreshing, making it impossible to navigate.

> - [PMM-9415](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9415): Fixed an issue where initial data restore on AWS instances fails. However,  consecutive data restore attempts were successful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [PMM-9415](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PMM-9415): Fixed an issue where initial data restore on AWS instances fails. However, consecutive data restore attempts were successful.
```
